[TECHNO EFFECTS]
>> I was on the United study
sections for many, many years.
And I was funded the very first
year I was a college professor.
I was an assistant professor
and on study sections
that first year, because I had
invented a technology called
photo-friendly labeling
that was widely
touted as being a very good
technique in biochemistry
for looking at certain
enzyme structure
and function, et cetera.
And to make a long story
short, I was funded probably
straight for 25,
26 years at least
on the same kind of project,
and sometimes double funded.
At one time, I had
a program to make
these compounds that were very
useful in diagnosis, et cetera.
And I had one, too,
that was concentrating
on Alzheimer's disease, because
our preliminary data had shown
that we could detect major
biochemical differences
between a normal brain tissue,
the enzymes that were active,
and Alzheimer's disease
with certain enzymes
that were almost 80%
to 99% inhibited.
And this gives you
a key as to what's
going wrong in the
Alzheimer's diseased brain.
And I got a five-year program
project grant to study that.
And at that time, what I knew--
reading up on
Alzheimer's disease--
is that it's not
genetically inherited.
I mean, you can have two parents
with Alzheimer's disease,
have children that never get it.
And a study from 500 sets of
identical twins from World War
II showed that one identical
twin could get Alzheimer's, and
the other one would not.
So there is a genetic
susceptibility.
So there's a strong
correlation with between twins,
but it's not absolute.
And that tells you there's
got to be a susceptibility
to an external toxin.
And at that time, people
were looking for that.
And they thought
it was aluminum.
Some reports had come out
saying it was aluminum.
Dr. Marksberry, at the
University of Kentucky,
had found elevated
mercury in the brains
of Alzheimer's patients
versus age-matched normals.
And so I thought
looking at heavy metals
would be the way to go.
So I did a set of
studies testing what
heavy metals would do this.
And mercury was one
of them I put in.
And at that time,
I had no concern
about amalgam fillings--
anything regarding
mercury toxicity.
But the phenomenal
data that came out
was that mercury,
and only mercury,
would cause the same
biochemical abnormalities
as you saw in
Alzheimer's disease
using our technology
for evaluating
the activity of certain enzymes.
It showed that the tubulin
was totally dysfunctional.
Mercury knocks that
out very quickly,
not only in control homogeneous.
But if we expose rats
to mercury vapor,
their tubulin, after
a period of time,
just dissipated like
you'd see in an AD brain.
And creatine kinase-- which
is an enzyme that's 99%
inhibited in the
AD brain relative
to age-matched controls.
And of course,
being a biochemist,
I know that enzyme quite well.
I was the one who
isolated and identified
its nucleotide binding site.
And it had a sulfur in it,
a very reactive sulfur.
And other people
before me had shown
that sulfur was critical to
the activity of the enzyme.
Of course, sulfur
is what mercury
is most highly attracted to.
And the third one was
glutamine synthetase.
It's known that glutamate
levels are elevated
in Alzheimer's disease brain.
And this is the
enzyme that removes
glutamate from the
synapse in a brain
after a neural transmission.
So we had three key
enzymes, and everyone
thought that was great.
No one's ever said I was wrong.
As a matter of fact,
they say I'm right.
There's no doubt about the fact
that the observation's right.
And when I got into
trouble was when I said,
mercury caused this.
And I got my next grant back.
And I had that data in
there, and a progress
report, et cetera,
and as something I
wanted to study further.
How could you reverse it?
How could you address it?
What was the effect of,
say, things like lead,
and aluminum,
cointoxicants on how much
mercury would require toxicity?
Because I knew that lead plus
mercury is not a-- toxicities
are not additive.
They're synergistic.
I mean, one plus one
will equal 10, 20, 100.
And when I got the review
back, the scientist part of it
was fine.
They knew I could
do the studies.
They knew I had the tissues.
But at the end, there
was this kind of thing.
And it said something
to the effect,
Dr. Haley has to
realize we don't
need to see any more of
these kinds of studies.
And my grant-- there was
some other comments in here
that were ridiculous.
And so I challenged that grant.
The NIH has a very fair system
that, if you don't like,
and you think people were
incorrect in making value
judgments about what you
have said you're going to do,
that you can challenge it.
So I challenged it.
It was sent to
another study section.
And the other study section
said, Dr. Haley's right.
These critiques-- some of them--
are ridiculously wrong.
And so I got my grant.
But the next time my grant
went in, it was triaged.
In other words, it's just,
this may be fine research,
but we just don't
want to do it anymore.
And so since that time, I have
never gotten another NIH grant.
And it coincided with the report
that mercury causes amalgams.
And there are a lot of
people who don't like that.
And I would point out
to anyone listening,
I've never been invited to
an Alzheimer's conference
to present my data.
And it's very, very dramatic.
I mean, it is dramatic.
No one else has identified
anything exposed
to humans that would
cause the production
of a major diagnostic
hallmark and three
of the major biochemical
abnormalities
you find in Alzheimer's disease,
because the people in Calgary,
Canada did studies on
neurons in a culture
and showed exactly what I
showed-- that mercury, and only
mercury, causes the breakdown
and the depolymerization
of tubulin off the
neurofibril, producing
neurofibrillary tangles, which
is the hallmark of Alzheimer's
disease.
Those were the same people
who did that that did the rat
studies with me where we tested
the brains after they exposed
the rats to mercury vapor
showing that, again, they
had an AD-like brain.
So it's somewhat
disconcerting that you
think that political people
have some control over NIH.
And if they like what
you're producing, fine.
But if it's politically
uncomfortable,
it's just not going to happen.
[TECHNO EFFECTS]